Critical reception[edit]
The music video for "Bed Intruder Song" achieved immense viral success. It became the most-viewed YouTube video of 2010 (excluding major label music videos) despite having been created in the summer of that year.[13]

Jason King, a songwriter and music journalist was quoted by NPR as saying "It's catchy. It has a really good hook, but it's problematic, too. There's a way in which the aesthetics of black poverty—the way they talk and they speak and they look—sort of becomes this fodder for humor without any interest in the context of the conditions in which people actually live."[14]

Michael Gregory told Billboard that he did question the appropriateness of taking a bad news story and making it into a musical parody but then came to the conclusion that "it's taking a terrible situation and making at least something positive out of it." The band is splitting the money they make from sales 50% with the Dodson family.[15] The Dodson family subsequently was able to move out of the projects.[16] Evan Gregory said of the song's success, "I think people are latching onto it is frankly quite similar to why they latch onto a classic ballad or pop song that tops the charts – because there's real emotion behind it that people identify with, even if, in this case, it was for unusual reasons."[15] Andrew Gregory said that "There are plenty of comments that quote funny lines from the song but one of the comments I see most often on our videos is, 'I can't get this out of my head.'"[2]

Baratunde Thurston of The Onion told NPR:

"As the remix took off, I became increasingly uncomfortable with its separation from the underlying situation. A woman was sexually assaulted and her brother was rightfully upset. People online seemed to be laughing at him and not with him (because he wasn't laughing), as Dodson fulfilled multiple stereotypes in one short news segment. Watching the wider Web jump on this meme, all but forgetting why Dodson was upset, seemed like a form of ‘class tourism.’ Folks with no exposure to the projects could dip their toes into YouTube and get a taste. [...] The creativity unleashed has been amazing, and what mitigates my fears of people minimizing the gravity of the situation is how Antoine himself has responded and taken charge of his own meme."[17]