The Ebola virus epidemic in West Africa has had a large effect on the culture of most of the West African countries. Many West African communities have a distrust in western and modern medicine, and rely on traditional healers and witch doctors, who use herbal remedies, massage, chant, and witchcraft to cure just about any ailment.(see Ebola conspiracies below.) Some cultures have a traditional solidarity of standing by the sick, which is contrary to the safe care of an Ebola patient.[1][2] In Liberia Ebola wiped out entire families, leaving perhaps one survivor to recount stories of how, because of their culture of touch, hold, hug and kiss, they simply could not be hands off while their loved ones were sick in bed.[3]

African soccer (football) is a national sport in just about every African country. It was brought to Africa by British colonials around the mid 1800s, with the first documented games taking place in 1862 in South Africa, a year before the official rules and regulations were set in London.[4][5] Witchcraft also plays a big part in soccer, however officials are trying to stamp out the practice of public witchcraft at the games.[6][7] Soccer is so important, that anything that can be wrapped into a round ball shape is kicked around by boys and men of all ages in all areas of Africa.[5] The Ebola epidemic put the 2015 African Cup of Nations at great risk, with fears of games becoming vectors for Ebola to spread.[8]

Some communities traditionally use folklore and mythical literature, often passed on verbally from one generation to the next to "explain the interrelationships of all things that exist". However the folklore and songs are not only of traditional or ancient historical origins, but are often about current events that have affected the community. Additionally, folklore and music will often take opposing sides of any story. Thus early in the Ebola epidemic, the song "White Ebola" was released by a diaspora based group and centers on the general distrust of "outsiders" who may be intentionally infecting people.[9][10]

This initial misinformation increased the general distrust in foreigners, and thoughts that Ebola was never there before, led to many health workers and aid convoys been attacked and blocked from checking remote areas. A burial team sent in to collect the bodies of suspected Ebola victims from West Point in Liberia, were blocked by several hundred residents chanting, "No Ebola in West Point." Health ministries and workers started an aggressive Ebola information campaign on all media formats to properly inform the residents and allow aid workers safe access to the high risk areas.[11][12] In Guinea, riots broke out after medics disinfected a market in Nzerekore. Locals rumored that the medics were actually spreading the disease. In nearby Womey, 8 people distributing information about Ebola were killed by the villagers.[13]